SYT/BS: Linux Basic Commands III Übungsblatt 06 Schuljahr 2024/25 an der HTL Wien 3 Rennweg Rennweg 89b, 1030 Wien A Goal Recap Linux user management, access control and important shell commands. Learn about system tools for basic system administration to get up to speed for upcoming lab exercises… and real Linux server management! B General For this lab you can use the existing Linux Mint VM you employed in your previous Linux lab exercises – create a new VM only if necessary! For best experience, do not forget to change the language of the your user account as well as your spell-checker to English! Run the following lab exercises in a terminal window on the command line (bash) using the account junioradmin (in your virtual machine). Apart from answering questions, be sure to note all command lines you have used in your lab report as well as their output! Use the man pages or the find/grep-Survival-Guide (the MOPS-page) if required!
C System Management (1) How many processes are currently running on your Linux host computer? How many on your VM? Deter- mine their number with just one command-line per each system (Hint: ps and wc). (2) List (with root privileges) all hard-drives and partitions of your VM (copy the command and the output into your lab report!). How many partitions exist on your harddrive(s)? (3) How long has your Linux host been up and running? Identify the exact value in minutes! (4) When were the last three reboots of your Linux host ? (5) Find Mania: Searching for specific files a. List all JPEG files (suffix .jpg) below /usr (only need the command line in lab report, not the output!)! b. How many files are there (let the machine do the counting) ? c. List all files with a size greater 4MiB beneath /boot ! Advanced: Print an ls -l listing of these files (Hint: Either use find ... | xargs ... or find ... -exec ls -l '{}' \;) """, """ (6) More Find Mania: What about all JPG-Files on the system with a size greater 100 KiB and less than 200 KiB ? List the names of these files using ls -l ! (7) Grep: How many “real” (regular) files (no directories) exist directly below /etc? How many directories? Identify each of the values with one command line Hint: one way to do this would use ls and grep and a pipe Fun fact – optional: another way is to use find (8) Yet More Find Mania: Which files were changed in the last twenty/forty minutes (Hint: find … -mmin …) … a. below /var/log (log files)? b. below ~ ? (9) SSH: (Hint: See our lab exercise on the Linux SSH server – you may need the package openssh-server). """, """ a. Start two terminals on your host (or WSL, or git bash, or another VM) and open one SSH session to your VM from each. How many User-Sessions are active on your VM? What command did you use to get that value? b. Only from Linux host or Linux VM with GUI Try to access the VM via SFTP (SSH FTP) by using the file browser on your Linux host – “sftp://ip-address” (substitute the IP address of the network interface of your VM - can be obtained with ip a)! (Hint: press Ctrl+L in order to edit the address in the browser): What directory is displayed and listed after the login? c. Only from Linux host or Linux VM with GUI: Open /etc/passwd of your Linux VM directly from your host desktop. This time you may – as an exception – use the graphical editor (on your host!)1 by double-clicking the file on the file browser! Display the line numbers. • How many lines are there (in the file)? • Bonus: Explain: How did this work - what happened behind the scenes when you accessed the file? """